A framed photo of the happy couple on their wedding day stands on a living room table, the bride in a traditional white gown, the groom in a tux. They live in a cozy house with a white picket fence, flowers and a big dog.

The wife serves coffee and cheerfully disappears. The husband starts to recall the events that led him to leave the Jesuits in 1986, marry and become suspended from the priesthood in 1987 and write a book questioning the Roman Catholic Church and its laws regarding the priesthood.

He still calls himself Father Terry Sweeney, a believing Catholic and a priest actively engaged in ministry. On occasion, he wears clerical garb.

About his relationship with the church, Sweeney says, "As far as I'm concerned, officially the doors are closed to me. But my heart is not closed to it."

In fact, as he tells it, his ministry is to the church: He wants to help change it in order to save it. Unlike many who have left the priesthood, often to marry, and turned their backs on the past, Sweeney will not let go of it. This has not been a clean break. His relationship to the church and the priesthood are, in fact, what his life is about.

"I have a sense of love and responsibility to the church," he says, "as a priest, as a married priest, as a Christian. I have an ongoing responsibility to inform the church."

Sweeney makes an important distinction here: There is the institutional church, administered out of the Vatican--which he calls a sacerdotal, or priestly, monarchy--and there is the church as the people of God. He counts himself among the latter and does not recognize the authority of the former as it is structured. His mission is to change that structure.

As a Jesuit, much of Sweeney's job involved television writing and production; he has continued with this and describes several television and film projects in various stages of completion. Plus, he has a book in the works on date rape. For some, this would be a full career, but it plays a secondary role in his life. Sweeney simply calls it his work--as opposed to his mission.

Out of that mission, he says, came "A Church Divided: The Vatican vs. American Catholics," published this month by Prometheus Books, as did another book he and his wife, actress Pamela Shoop, have just completed. In the former, Sweeney explores church authority and the priesthood, especially regarding celibacy and the ordination of women. In the latter, "What God Hath Joined," he and Shoop write alternating chapters telling their story.

Besides leading him to writing, Sweeney's mission involves him, with his wife, in two groups: Good Tidings, a national organization "for priests and women in love" that counsels such couples and helps them reach decisions, and CORPUS, an acronym for Corps of Reserve Priests United for Service, an organization of 11,000 members, many of them married priests. CORPUS's goal, he says, is to return to a ministry that has both celibate and married male and female priests.

"I would like to be a diocesan priest (as opposed to being a member of a religious order like the Jesuits) if the authoritarian structure of the church changes," he says. "I would love to minister, but I would in no way act as if the executive authority of the church depends on one bishop, or Pope, making the decisions. Authority flows from the community."

Father Terrance Sweeney, S.J., caused a national uproar in 1986 when he refused a Jesuit order to destroy all data and "cease and desist" work on his survey of American bishops regarding their attitudes toward celibacy and women's ordination.

The survey, he says, was intended to complement seven years of personal research on authority, obedience, celibacy and women priests. And that research had been prompted by Sweeney's hesitation to take his final solemn vows as a Jesuit in 1978.

A native Angeleno, Terry Sweeney graduated from Loyola High School and entered the Jesuit order in 1962, on the eve of Vatican Council II, the gathering that sparked so much change and ferment within the church. As part of the 15-year course of Jesuit formation, he took vows of poverty, celibacy and obedience in 1964, taught high school, was ordained in 1973 and earned a doctorate in theology at the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley. As a last step, he was to take the final vows.

He never did.

He hesitated, increasingly troubled, he says, by the vow of obedience. He wanted to explore more fully what it entailed. In the process, he says, he became disquieted not only by the "dark side of the church" on authority, birth control, the Vietnam War and women priests, but also by his own silent acquiescence. He had kept his mouth shut and remained seated on the fence.